[Music] hello everyone I'm Norman Wildberge
rwe're looking at box arithmetic and today I
want to move towards a really classical result
in number Theory going back to Oiler and I want
to show you that box arithmetic presents us with
an opportunity of thinking about classical number
Theory results like this in a new and exciting
way in fact perhaps a more logical way than we
currently have this is also going to be an
opportunity for me to review some important
things that we've already talked about in box
arithmetic and to go a little bit further and
introduce some um more ideas and I'm hoping that
you're going to see that this box arithmetic has
some kind of naturalness to it there's almost a
sense of inevitability about some of the things
that are going on on just have things are sort of
slot together in a very pleasant way so this is
an opportunity of really rethinking a lot of the
elements in our mathematical landscape starting
from a very foundational point of view okay so
the result we're going to be talking about is the
oiler product for the so-called zeta function the
reman zeta function so uh let's introduce that the
following way so the the zeta function comes about
by looking at a series like this so let's start
with n a natural natural number then Zeta of n is
the sum of the reciprocals 1/ K to the n k going
from 1 to Infinity this the classical definition
so 1 + 1/ 2 the n + 1 over 3 the n+ 1 over 4
the N plus and so on so we think of n as being a
natural number like five and we think of this as
defining a real number a real number okay by this
process of Performing this infinite number of of
arithmetical operations always adding smaller and
smaller objects to the total now this is seriously
problematic from my point of view because in my
world you're not allowed to do arithmetic with
an infinite number of things that's not how
our arithmetical operations are defined they
are typically binary operations okay you can add
numbers two at a time but you can't add suddenly
an infinite number of things and moreover even
before you get to the infinite number of things
the numbers that you're adding here are getting
so um so small but the denominators are getting
so huge that these totals that we're getting so
at any given time the total that we're getting
is some huge rational number which uh ultimately
blows out on us beyond the size of the universe
so long before we get to Infinity we are styed
here in in just adding up these um these finite
uh Series so that's the whole thing is seriously
problematic having to do with the essential nature
of the objects that we're studying but let us
carry on with the usual story okay the usual
story is that this real number that we've obtained
here for a fixed n is equal to this product okay
so it's a product over P prime numbers 1/ 1 -
P to the- n this was written down by Leonard
Oiler I guess actually perhaps in his thesis and
published in 1737 and what is thing here well
it's a product of things and each one of these
things is actually the result of a so-called
geometric Series so if you take 1 + 1 2 the n
+ 1 / 2 to the 2 n + 1/ 2 to the 3 n that's a
geometric series with first term 1 and ratio 1/ 2
the N we're multiplying by 1 over 2 the N all the
time so the formula for such a thing is 1/ 1 minus
this common ratio so 1 over 2 the N or 2 Theus n
okay that's the the formula for when p is 2 that's
the formula when p = 3 and then P 5 and then when
P = 7 and then when P equals 11 Etc so um if we
have n a fixed natural number this is supposed to
be a real number again the result of an infinite
number of process again the result of an infinite
arithmetical calculation and we have one of these
for each prime and as we go further on here these
numbers are getting closer to one because the
things that we're adding to one are getting
really small so these are numbers real numbers
with decimal expansions that start like 1. a whole
bunch of zeros and then some stuff and the idea is
that well um one can prove a kind of a convergence
in the usual fashion that this product here sort
of stabilizes supposedly converges to yet another
real number and the claim is that that real number
that you're obtaining here with this infinite
product is equal to this earlier uh real number
that you obtained with this infinite Series so um
although I think this is entirely um problematic
it is a very standard uh sort of starting point
for a huge amount of analytic number Theory but
my aim is to try to see if we can think about
what's really going on here there's something
really interesting going on here but I want to
be able to access that in a in a more logical
correct way and and I think that box arithmetic
provides some kind of framework for creating
such an an alternative more logical framework
and that's what we're going to be talking about
today in this video which is going to be a little
bit long because there's quite a lot of uh things
to talk about all right so box arithmetic is an
attempt to set up the foundations of arithmetic
from a multi set point of view so not using set
theory but using multiset Theory which is a
more flexible environment and allows us to uh
do certain things that we're not able to do in the
set theory world now I'm going to give you just a
simplified version of this in particular I'm not
going to talk about the exciting developments that
result from introducing anti anti boxes okay so
we're just going to stick with the the simple
version here so in the world of boxes we start
with zero which is just an empty box so everything
is kind of a box in this world but the boxes can
contain other boxes and so they can be nested okay
so the simplest box is just a single empty box and
that has the name zero if we put a bunch of these
zeros inside a box then we get a natural number so
that's the natural number one that's the natural
number two Etc and then if we put this one here
inside a box so this thing here represents a box
which contains a box which contains a box if we
were just writing it in terms of boxes so that's
a new kind of object might call that Alpha this
is the Box containing two it's Alpha squ and here
we get the the poly numbers Okay so zero then
here are the natural numbers here are the poly
numers or pols in in one variable and then if we
Nest further if we take one of these and put it
in a box we get uh what's called a multi- number
okay and then there's a sequence of multi- numbers
um like this and the whole thing keeps on going
because we can just keep nesting these things and
actually we don't have a lot of experience with
the the vastness that that goes on below here but
there is an arithmetic that's you know that's in
theory accessible to us that we can investigate
but actually for standard algebra um actually
just these levels are pretty interesting but
today we're going to see that the multi level
uh is also uh quite interesting and has direct
applications to to number Theory now Associated
to this natural hierarchy there's also sort of
counting objects so um we introduce Zed so Zed
of any box a is by definition zero so it doesn't
matter what you've got if you apply Zed to it you
get zero then n of a a is again an arbitrary box
in this world n of a is the box that consists of
all Z of a where a is an element in a so if we're
talking about a box like this right the elements
are this is an element this is an element and this
is an element so all the boxes that are directly
inside the box that you're considering those are
the elements of the box so basically what we doing
here when we're applying n of a is we're replacing
all of the objects with zero and and that results
in a natural number okay and that natural number
is the the size it's we're counting how big the
original box was in some sense so that's the the
N of a uh counting object so for example this
thing here uh we replace each one of these guys
with just a zero and then this thing here
we recognize oh that's the natural number
three okay so then there's a natural inductive
story here in fact there's a natural inductive
story pretty well for everything that we do here
okay everything just keeps on going down so P of
a is then the Box consisting of the N of A's as we
run through the elements of a so here is some box
if we apply P to it what we have to do is we have
to apply n to each one of its elements so it has
one 2 3 4 five elements n of this thing is zero
because this has zero things in it n of this thing
is two because it has two things in it n of this
and this are also zero and this one here also has
two elements in it so n of this is two so applying
P to this box here gives this box here this is a
box containing natural number so it's sort of at
the poly level okay and in fact it's 3 + 2 Alpha 2
a single two is like an alpha squ and there's two
of them so we get 3 + 2 Alpha squ and so typically
when we're counting like this what we're getting
as a result of the count is uh an element in one
of these levels and as we go further down well
the the object that we're getting as a result
of the count is more and more sophisticated so
for example the next level would be say m of a
where we for any box a we consider the box of P of
A's where a is in a so this inductive or recursive
way of introducing these counting uh functions if
we like all right so to have a nice arithmetic we
need some operations the first operation is
addition so given any two boxes addition is
just what you get when you dump the contents of
both of those boxes into a new box that's a very
Elementary kind of thing that you can do in the
multiset world that you can't do in the set World
okay so this is really the critical operation on
upon which everything is based so this box plus
this box just dump them all in we get one one
one there's a two and there's a three so that's
the result of adding these boxes when we multiply
boxes what we do is we use the previously defined
operation of addition so what we're going to do
is we're going to take the sum of all possible
um pairs of an element here and an element here so
we take this plus this which is two this plus this
which is four this plus this which is two this
plus this which is four this plus this which is
three this plus this which is five so that's how
we multiply two boxes and again this all these
operations are not restricted to any one level so
this is not just an operation on natural numbers
no it's an operation on any of the boxes no matter
how complicated or how far down they are in the
hierarchy okay then the next operation which we
we call the carrot operation it's sort of like
an exponential in some ways but it's not really an
exponential it's something a little bit different
here's a box here's a box to find the carrot of
them again we perform all possible um combinations
where we take one here and one here but now we
multiply those two okay we use the previously
defined operation so 1 * 1 is 1 1 * 3 is 3 1 * 1
is 1 1 * 3 is 3 2 * 1 is 2 and 2 * 3 is 6 so this
mset or this box car this m set or this box is
this mset or box and clearly we can just carry on
we have more and more complicated operations
starting from these simple ones addition
multiplication carrot so these operations are all
commutative and associative and just to practice a
few more carrots which are going to be sort of the
the main focus for today's talk so here's another
box another box we have to multiply them 0 * 0
is 0 0 * 1 is 0 1 * 0 is 0 and 1 * 1 is 1 okay
easy how about this one 1 2 Carro 1 two 1 * 1 is
1 1 * 2 is 2 2 * 1 is 2 and 2 * 2 is 4 and let's
introduce this sort of simplified more concise way
of representing the multiplicity here right this
two is occurring with multiplicity too so let this
little index on the left lower left represent the
multiplicity with which this object is occurring
just a way of writing things out a little bit more
um efficiently so for example if we take the M
set one two and we perform carrot to the three
in other words we take this box carrot itself
carrot itself okay then it's like taking this
thing here and carting it once more with a box one
two well you can check that we're going to get a
box with just ones twos fours and eights there's
going to be one one there's going to be three twos
there's going to be three fours and there's going
to be a single eight okay so um now that we have
operations I can write down a few counting laws
so some some laws that our counting functions
satisfy and I've given some examples I'm not
going to go through them all you can check them
hopefully I haven't made uh any any errors but I
don't guarantee it so the first one is that n of
a plus b is n of a plus n of B and you know if I
say not otherwise uh A and B are just arbitrary
boxes doesn't matter what they have in them okay
so if we take the sum of two boxes they say like
these ones here okay there's the sum just what you
get when you dump them all in okay and you count
uh the number in the sum well that's five and the
number here is two and the number here is three
and 2 plus three is five so it's kind of obvious
remember multiplicities count for something right
so you know there's two twos here they each count
as being an element so there's one element another
element and another element there's there's three
elements in that box if we look at P of a * B well
that's P of a * P of B so uh here's a box and
here's another box and multiplying them we have
to take the sum of all possible combinations so
2 + 1 is three uh 2 plus this thing well two is
really the the Box containing z0 so if we add
this one and this one we get the box containing
0 0 Alpha well well you can think of this one
as being really the Box containing zero so if
we take this one and and add this one we get the
box containing zero and three and if we add this
one this one we take get the box containing three
and Alpha and then P of of these things well we
have to replace each one of these by their sizes
so this has size two this is a box of size two in
the sense that uh n of it is two this is a box
that just has one thing in it so it size is one
so this is replaced with two and one here this
one's replaced with one one and when we perform
the product of these two boxes well we have to
take all possible sums 2 + 1 is 3 2+ 1 is 3 1 + 1
is 2 1 + 1 is 2 and we see that uh these numbers
here count the the numbers uh the sizes of these
things that's got three elements that's got three
elements that's got two elements that's got two
elements okay um and then there's a corresponding
one for the carrot that M of a carat B is M of
a carot M of B and here is an a here is a b
here is my attempt at writing down the carrot
okay and over here are the the M's of these
things so here is M of this here's M of this
and here's M of this and I'll let you stare at
that and convince yourself I hope that uh that
I've done it correctly and that this this law is
being reflected here so in this series so far we
haven't looked at the carrot operation too much
but that's going to be as I mentioned before very
important for us to try to understand this zeta
function an oil or product identity so let's have
a little bit more practice with that so here for
example is another application so you can sort
of see the binomial theorem again in carrot form
that if we take 1 a and we take the carrot to the
fourth power so this box carrot itself carrot
itself carrot itself okay so we're taking all
possible products of of entries here okay so we
we'll end up getting a a box with elements 1 a a
2 a cubed and a to 4th okay and the multiplicities
of those things are 1 4 641 and you can see this
is just a form of the the binomial theorem in this
box arithmetic world let's go a little bit further
and consider maybe a trinomial so let's consider
um a box with three things say 1 2 and 2 squared
and comp it with itself so what are we going to
get we going to get 1 * 1 1 * 2 1 * 2 2 got 2 * 1
2 * 2 2 * 2 2 and 2 2 * 1 2 2 * 2 and 2 2 * 2 2
and then when we think about that we're getting
the elements one like 1 * 1 is 1 we're getting
two 1 * 2 and 2 * 1 we're getting actually two
of them and how many two squares are we getting
well we're getting this one here we're getting
this one here and we're getting this one here
there's three of them and how many T cubes are
we getting well we're getting this 2 * this 2^
s and this 2 s * this 2 so there's two of them
and there's only one 2 the 4th so we're getting
1 2 3 2 1 as the coefficients if we jack that up
a little bit and take 1 2 2^ 2 2 cubed so an M
set with four things and we again form a squared
karat operation of that well we're getting again
the sequence of powers and the coefficients go
up linearly 1 2 3 4 to a Max and then back down
3 2 1 and more generally if we have say 1 a a
2 a cubed and we take the carat square of that
we're going to get 1 a a squ all the way up to
a to the 6 with coefficients 1 2 3 4 3 2 1 just as
in this case here so there sort of a potential for
just thinking about algebraic identities perhaps
familiar ones but maybe just using a different
language uh maybe this shows us something new
for us you know maybe gives us a little bit of
additional insight into other wise familiar things
but maybe it also allows us to discover new things
well often times patterns are most easily seen
when we allow them to keep on going where we
don't insist that we you go up to some point and
then stop but just let some natural sequence just
keep on going that of course involves logical
issues because we have to interpret what we
mean by any arithmetical statements involving such
ongoing things that's a an important uh issue for
the algebraic calculus course for example in the
algebraic calculus 2 course where we're looking at
essentially power series but we want to interpret
them in ultimately a kind of a finite explicit way
where we are not assuming that we're able to
do an infinite number of things even though
something is is going on you know beyond our view
we almost have to adopt a a ancient Greek point
of view towards these things that's what we're
going to do here so there's some logical issues
now that need to be clarified before we have a
a correct Theory along the lines I'm going to
suggest now and I'm so I'm just uh outlining
some some further directions later on we can
think about okay but there's some patterns here
here that I want us to become aware of and it's
an interesting story so let's have a look at sort
of on some ongoing versions of what we just wrote
down so let's consider a box whose entries are 1
a a squ a cubed is there so a here is potentially
just another box okay and we're taking the carrot
squared of this thing here so taking this thing
and carting it with itself forming all possible
products well we're going to get a one we're
going to get because 1 * 1 is is one we're going
to get an A like 1 * the second a and also a times
the second one okay we're going to get an A squ
that's going to appear in three different ways
we're going to get an a cub that's going to appear
in four different ways so what we're getting is
an ongoing sequence where we also have um all the
increasing powers of a but the coefficients are 1
2 3 4 5 just the natural numbers and their natural
sequence now if we do something just a little bit
more sophisticated and look at the third carat
of the same thing in other words multiply this
thing by this thing again in a in the carrot sense
carrot this with this then we're getting a similar
kind of sequence but now the coefficients are 1
3 6 10 15 Etc we recognize the Triangular numbers
and if we do carot to the fourth power you can
check that we're going to get a similar series
with coefficients which are the pyramidal numbers
1 4 10 20 35 Etc so what we're doing here is we're
touching base with one of our favorite objects the
Harriet Pascal array features prominently in the
algebraic calculus of course in many other
areas of mathematics so we can think about
it like this so it's like a pascal triangle and
the columns here sort of the Harriet um columns
they're ongoing okay and any one of these columns
like triangular numbers pyramidal numbers Etc and
higher versions of them they're going to be
naturally then appearing as coefficients of
these um sort of like something like a binomial U
series but in in the in the carrot World involving
these um sort of basic geometrical boxes
all right so I've given enough structure
and examples that but I can now show you the the
main identity of this lecture which I I'm going to
call the fundamental identity of arithmetic so I
think this is a really important um thing that's
right here okay and it's in my view some kind of
box arithmetic equivalent or restatement of the
fundamental theorem of arithmetic and we'll see
that it's not very far away from the oiler prod
for the zeta function but let's just have a
look at it by itself so we're taking a carrot
of a bunch of ongoing boxes they're all of the
kind that we've just been talking about we have
one and then two and then powers of two two squ
2 cubed Etc going on okay and then the next one
is the same kind of thing but with the prime three
and its powers and then the next one is the prime
five and its powers and the next one is the prime
7even and its powers and we keep on going over
primes p and we want to take the carrot of all
of these so what does that mean well it means
that we're forming a box okay whose elements are
obtained by taking one element in here multiplying
it by one element here multiplying it by one
element in here multiplying it by one element
in here Etc well obviously we need to say a little
bit more precisely what we mean by that because we
don't want to be multiplying an infinite number
of things together so we'll agree that the kinds
of products that we're considering in this in
this ongoing carrot uh product are ones where
only a finite number of the elements that we're
picking are not equal to one so most of the time
the the element that we choose from one of these
boxes is one or to put it another way once we
get to a certain point then from that point on
we're only going to be choosing the one in all
subsequent boxes okay so we might for example
choose 2^ 2 * 3 * 5 cubed and then after that
just one one one one one and then so the number
that we would have gotten would be 2^ S * say
maybe 3 * 5 Cub whatever that is okay and the
statement is that in the world of box arithmetic
suitably you know suitably um defined suitably
interpreted that the re result of this ongoing
carrot product is this box the Box just consisting
of the natural number starting with one 1 2 3 4
Etc so this is a statement of box arithmetic
and it's not too hard to see that this is really
somehow equivalent to the fundamental theorem
of arithmetic what we're saying is that any
number any natural number like 12 okay 12 is
going to appear exactly once in this product
in fact we know what it's going to be it's going
to be obtained by taking this 2^ squar and that
three and all the others are going to be one
so we're just taking the appropriate Prime
power factors of whatever number we're talking
about okay so this is just a a restatement in
the world of box arithmetic of the fundamental
theorem of arithmetic but it's it's interesting
to think about it that way now let me introduce
the summation operator or the sum operator capital
S which is like a counting function but it's a
little bit different okay we're going to Define
s of a a is a box to be the sum of little a in
a of a so the elements of a box are boxes and we
can always add boxes so what we're going to do is
we're just going to add up all the boxes which are
inside a which are elements of a we're going to
call this the sum of capital A so for example
what's S Sub three well three is officially this
box here it's the Box containing a zero a zero and
a zero so s of that is what you get when you add
up all these elements so 0 plus 0 plus 0 and that
total is zero so s of three is zero and in fact
s of any natural number is going here's s of a PO
polinomial or poly number 2 + 3 Alpha plus Alpha
4th what does this thing actually look like well
it's a box it's got two zeros that's the two it's
got three ones those that's the three Alpha and
it's got a four representing the alpha to the four
so s of that is what you get when you add up all
of these elements 0 + 0 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 4 uh which
is seven so s of this poly number is seven here's
something a little bit more sophisticated so we
have a box with three boxes inside this is the
Box containing two this is the Box containing both
three and Alpha supposed to be separate and this
is the Box containing alpha 1 which is a multi
number okay so s of this is well we have to take
this box and this box and this box and we have
to add them well adding boxes we just dump them
up so we get the box containing two containing
three containing Alpha and containing Alpha 1
so that's just taking the sum of a
box and now there are some summation
lws I'm going to show you three of them it's this
third one here that's particularly interesting for
us all right but let's have a look at the simpler
ones first s of a plus b equals s of a plus s of
B there's a box there's another box there's the
sum of the boxes s of this is 1 plus alpha s of
this is 2 plus Alpha cubed s of this thing is
1 + 2 + Alpha plus Alpha cubed which is the
same as 3 + Alpha plus Alpha cubed and that's
the same as what you get when you add those
things s of a * B is s of a * n of B the number
of elements in B if you like plus n of a * s of
B so here's a say 1 Alpha we're multiplying by
2 Alpha cubed so to multiply we have to take all
possible sums 1 + 2 is 3 1 plus this is this
Alpha + 2 is that and this plus this is that
okay that's the the product of these two things
so what is s of this s of this is um 1 + alpha
s of this is 2 + Alpha cubed what's n of this
well it has two elements what's n of this it's
two elements so the right hand side is s of
a plus n of B that's 2 plus n of a which is
2 * s of B which is this and the claim is that
that's equal to the sum of this thing which is
three plus this plus this plus this which totals
gives us six plus uh I guess 2 Alpha plus 2 Alpha
cubed and this equals this and now s of a karat
B claim the S of a carat B is s of a Time s of
B so if we use the same guys here so 1 Alpha carot
2 Alpha cubed so to carrot something we have to
take products so 1 * 2 is 2 1 * Alpha Cub is Alpha
Cub Alpha * 2 is 2 Alpha and Alpha * Alpha Cub is
Alpha 4th s of this is 1 plus alpha s of this is
2 + Alpha cubed s of this is 2 + 2 Alpha + Alpha
cubed + Alp 4 and if we multiply these two we
get 2 + 2 Alpha plus Alpha cubed plus Alpha
4th naturally you thinking okay but what about if
we keep on going further down in this hierarchy
of boxes what are the corresponding summation
laws what are the corresponding counting laws
this is vast realm of arithmetic unexplored
arithmetic which you can be the first to
explore to discover so now let's go back
to what we call the fundamental identity
of arithmetic and see if this summation law
that we've just looked at applies to that and
and gives us any kind of information now this
is a delicate operation because we haven't read
really properly nail down what we mean by the
arithmetic of these unbounded or ongoing boxes
okay so there's there's something to be done
there hopefully we can um frame all of that
in a very finite explicit way so that we're
still able to actually make logically correct
statements about such things but if we just say
look at things informally now um so here was
something similar to what we wrote down remember
we had this box of powers of two and then box of
powers of three and box of powers of five and
then of seven and we were uh carting them all
together okay but now if we apply sort of the
S function to everything well s of this first
box what we have to do is we have to sum all
the elements so that's 1 + 2 + 2 2 + 2 cubed
Etc there's a sum of the the box of powers of
three there's the sum of the powers of the box
with powers of five Etc and this law is telling
us that we should multiply these things together
we should multiply the sums and that should be
the sum of the carrot while the carrot is on the
right hand side the carrot was this box of all
natural numbers and S of that is going to be the
sum 1+ 2+ 3 + 4 Etc so very naively informally
without real a good precise understanding what
this actually means we're getting so I should
put everything in quotes yes definitely because
this is just a some kind of idea currently we
have some kind of um equality between you know
this summation times this summation times this
summation times the summation Etc equaling this
summation and I claim that this is pretty close
to the oiler product uh story but we just need
to twist things and that's that's a new kind
of thing that we have to introduce some sort
of multiplicative functional here to convert this
thing here into something which um converges in
the usual analytic sense of things so that's what
we're going to do in our next video introduce a
Twist that will allow us to see the oiler product
as a natural manifestation of this law applied
to the fundamental identity of arithmetic
I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening